right so gamma ray bursts
what are they all about
well the story goes back to the 1960s
and the cold war
actually and the uh monitoring of the
partial test ban treaty the
uh americans and russians agreed this
partial
test ban treaty to ban atmospheric
atomic tests
and in order to monitor it
the americans decided they would launch
a series of special satellites
called the velar satellites that were
looking down
at the earth and were looking for
any of the high energy gamma rays
associated with the explosion of a
nuclear device
and if they saw them they would report
back and report the timing of them
and with a cluster of them up there
the differential timing between the
arrival of the
pulse at different sites could
allow the americans to triangulate back
to work out where
abouts they had come from that was the
idea anyway
and you see a little artist's impression
there of uh
one of the velar satellites they
launched quite a few of them
fairly simple beasts with uh covered in
solar panels
in that uh icosahedral shape
but with a gamma ray detector pointing
down towards the earth
and then in 1967
on the 2nd of july the valor 3
and 4 satellite group that were up at
the time
detected the first gamma-ray flash
and this initially caused a bit of a
stir in the american
intelligence community thinking that
somebody had set off a nuclear weapon
when they shouldn't have been doing so
but they soon realized that the shape
of the pulse of gamma rays didn't seem
to match
that of any known type of nuclear weapon
and they fairly quickly dismissed it as
such and filed it away under
curiosity and gradually
over time more and more of these flashes
were seen
in fact they started building up a map
and realized they were coming not from
objects on the ground but from all over
the sky
and so by the 1973 time frame
they actually got around to publishing a
paper in the astrophysical journal
alerting the normal scientific community
to this phenomenon that had been
observed
by the intelligence people and
publishing this map
showing the location and intensity of
all of these
uh strange gamma-ray flashes that they
were seeing
all over the sky and
numerous people started putting forward
different possible explanations for this
from colliding comets
to neutron stars to quasars all sorts of
things
but as time went on we got to 1979
and a very famous incident occurred the
valor incident which sounds like the
title of a bad 1970s uh
sci-fi movie but it was again one of
these veiler satellites detected
a signal from the ground and you can see
the
graphs there showing it
now this doesn't look like a gamma ray
burst this does look like
the characteristic pulse from a nuclear
weapon and let me explain why
it's a double pulse um what happens
with the gamma ray bursts is you get a a
flash of gamma rays that brightens and
then fades away
but with the nuclear weapon what happens
is you get the initial flash
from the uh initiation of the explosion
and then the region around the expanding
nuclear fireball becomes
opaque to gamma rays and scatters them
in every
direction and absorbs reabsorbs them for
a while
until it dissipates and then you get the
second pulse
releasing the gamma rays back out of the
cooling fireball it becomes transparent
to gamma rays again
and so you always get this double flash
now that's what i meant when i said that
the
initial observations didn't see anything
that looked like a standard nuclear
weapon because they didn't see
this characteristic too humped um
trace for the intensity of the gamma
rays
but in 1979 they surely did make sure
this double flash
characteristic of a nuclear bomb
and the arecibo radio observatory also
detected the radio pulse from it from
whatever this event was
and for a long time people were arguing
about it
but they were able to trace the sight of
it
to be prince edward island which is
shown
here as the red dot on the map now this
is
off the uh coast thousands of miles off
the coast
of south africa this this is the
southern tip of africa here with uh
cape town about there so way off in the
middle of nowhere on this little island
prince edward island
almost all the way to antarctica this is
madagascar here
and for a very long time that people
speculated about what this might be
and no one was admitting anything
uh one possibility was that
it was some sort of uh freak asteroid
coming in from outer space
and detonating or exploding in the
atmosphere
but again no one could really account
for the uh
double flash it was even speculated that
it might have been a
an asteroid made of antimatter that
would have
perhaps caused a nuclear explosion
but recently
they've managed to identify that they
were indeed a pulse of
the characteristic iodine 131 isotope
found in australian sheep a few years
after
the event and this is a dead giveaway
that it was in fact
an ordinary uranium nuclear
weapon and the theory goes that it was
actually an undeclared nuclear test
there was a collaboration between south
africa who provided the facilities
and israel who provided the bomb
using material that they'd borrowed from
the americans shall we say
i think they stole it actually
um so
from 1997 though we started to be able
to use better satellites
and better telescopes and be able to
begin the process of identifying where
these flashes were
on the sky with a greater degree of
accuracy
and the uh bepo sax
satellite pictured here managed to catch
the x-rays which
come as a secondary flash after
the gamma rays have died down in grbs
and together with the herschel
william herschel telescope they managed
to also find the optical
afterglow of the event
now that was uh excellent because they
were able to measure their power
apparent brightness and also
look at the redshift from the optical
spectrum
and get the distance from the redshift
based on the expansion of the universe
and realized that the distance was
immense it was halfway across the
visible universe
and therefore the power output of the
event itself must be tremendous this was
an absolutely enormously bright object
to be seen
as bright as it appeared at that
distance
and that was followed up by an even
better
pinning down of an event in 1998
supernova 1998 bw
occurred in a galaxy 140 million light
years away
just one day after a gamma ray burst had
been tracked to the same location
and this was the first time that we were
really able to
provide this linkage between gamma ray
bursts
and supernovae and they even were able
to
track back and look at photographs of
the galaxy in high resolution from
before the event
and figured out that there was a large
star there
25 to 40 solar masses so
a real whopper and so this was a clue
that the whole thing probably had
something to do with the
supernova detonation of this very
massive star
now just as an aside we'll just go back
and have a little
uh refresher on where stars get their
energy and what happens to them
in their life cycle so
for an ordinary star once the
temperature in the core
due to the crushing pressure of gravity
reaches
a point where you get to 10 million
degrees
that's hot enough for nuclear fusion to
begin
as shown in the diagram the ordinary
first
few steps from hydrogen on the left here
fusing together to make the heavy
isotope of hydrogen
deuterium to make helium in form of
helium-3
and then on to helium-4
and that's the normal process that
drives most
what we call ordinary or main sequence
stars they are converting hydrogen to
helium
and releasing energy along the way
but in massive stars the temperature in
the middle can go
up way beyond that 10 million degree
ignition point and get up to
hundreds or even billions of degrees
and that is hot enough to cause further
rounds of element generation and
consumption
and so for a moderately massive star
that was perhaps 20
solar masses you would get
hydrogen being burned as we say to
helium
and that would be likely to last at
about seven million years
and then the helium will start burning
itself and give the
star another half million years as the
helium is converted to carbon
the carbon will be consumed over a
period of 600 years
to give us neon
and indeed some oxygen as well and then
the neon
can be burned to further elements for a
year and the oxygen will give you
another six months
by this stage you've created silicon and
you can burn silicon
and form iron and you get one more day
of life
for your star out of that process but at
the end of that
your star has run out of options and run
out of luck
and it will explode and the reason being
that the
uh source of energy in the center gets
suddenly switched off
because iron can't be converted to
heavier elements
and release energy in the process it
actually consumes
energy to go any further and therefore
suddenly the
core cools down and can't support the
overlying
crushing pressure of all of the outer
layers
so they implode and crush the
the middle down now
this process occurs for stars that are
over
ten and a half solar masses in fact
anything below ten and a half
and they stop at the uh the silicon neon
uh sort of stage then they end up as
oxygen neon magnesium
silicon white dwarf stars if there are
between eight and ten and a half solar
masses
so that makes white dwarfs but over ten
and a half solar masses they will go on
and try and build an iron core and then
they will explode
as a supernova in fact they build the
next element up they do build
nickel but they build a radioactive form
of nickel called nickel 60
which soon decays back to iron so that's
actually the
the end stage there but of course they
blow up
spectacularly when this implosion occurs
um and collides with what it forms in
the center
which will probably be for a modestly
giant star it'll be a neutron star
as has happened here in the crab nebula
and a neutron star is an artist's
impression
would be about the size of a city but
contain
perhaps one or two solar masses of
material
crushed down to a density where you have
the same density as an atomic nucleus
because it's just a ball of neutrons
covered by a thin
crust of other material and these things
will form as long as your star is less
than about
20 solar masses so in that 10 and a half
to 20 range
you'll get a neutron star
if the star was bigger than 20 solar
masses then
it will try and form a neutron star but
the resulting central
dense core will exceed the 2.5
solar mass limit called the tolman
oppenheimer volkov limit
which is the maximum mass for a neutron
star
they can't support themselves the
strength of the neutron matter if you
like
is uh exceeded by the pressure of
gravity
at which point the whole thing then so
the story goes
collapses down to a black hole
now that's the simplified life cycle of
giant stars
in one go but it explains
that we get one of two outcomes either a
neutron star or a black hole
actually things are a little more
complicated
that's the subject for a different talk
though
now in 2004 to go back to the gamma ray
story this swift satellite was launched
and this
is an excellent tool it can detect gamma
rays from anywhere on the sky
and then pivot on its axis and slew and
lock onto the target
and pick up the x-ray and optical um
components of the explosions and also
alert the rest of the astronomical
community down on earth so that other
instruments can be
rapidly brought into play and what this
enabled was them to catch
the gamma-ray bursts very early on in
their life within
seconds or even fractions of a second
of uh their initiation
and so we've now been able to construct
quite a lot of
light curves for different gamma ray
bursts
and you've got a selection of them here
you can see that
time going along the bottom and the
brightness going up the side
and they're quite complicated there's
you look at this and you
initially think gosh they're all over
the place there's
single bursts like
this one or this one or this one or this
one
and then there's ones with multiple
peaks double peaks and really
complicated structures
and it's quite uh daunting to sort of
look at all of that
but if you study it a bit more closely
you
you notice the time scale along the
bottom is not the same for all of them
some of them we're going from the sort
of just before the explosion like minus
two hit seconds
to 40 seconds 80 seconds
20 60. others are much shorter this
one's only going to five and the peak
was very narrow
again very narrow here and so
fairly soon they were able to classify
these
into two groups
you could divide them into short
gamma ray bursts that had a peak
lasting from milliseconds to seconds
and then there were long-duration
gamma-ray bursts that last
tens of seconds to tens of minutes even
and this is very suggestive that there
were two different processes at work
now short gamma ray bursts if we take a
look at those first up to about two
seconds in
duration about 30 percent of the uh
categorized gamma ray bursts were
classed as short and they were mostly
found to be coming from
the environs of giant elliptical
galaxies
i think this this is uh one going off
here
in this uh large elliptical galaxy
and large elliptical galaxies are
regions that are full of
yellow orange and red stars that are all
dwarf sized and small and long-lived
and the reason is that there is very
little gas and dust left in these
galaxies it's
all been consumed into stars
so they're quite aged galaxies
and as a result of
that age all of the very big and bright
stars have exploded
in the 10 to 20 million years of their
short lives for giant stars they've
become a supernova
and are no longer shining
so they're no longer any white stars or
any blue white
super hot stars in these galaxies
and there are no new stars being formed
so this is interesting this tells us
that these gamma-ray bursts
can't really be associated with
the death of giant stars because there
just aren't any anymore
in these galaxies these these grbs in
elliptical giant elliptical galaxies are
associated with
a galaxy where the stars are old age
now the other clue is the fact that they
are short duration
and whenever an event is of a short
duration
it must come from a small region of
space
it's just not possible to have a single
event
that occurs and is coordinated
over a large region of space in a very
short time
and the limit is the speed of light
because whatever it is that is the
trigger
be it at one edge or as in the diagram
here in the core
if the trigger is in the core it can
only be
known that the trigger event has
occurred
after the passage of enough time for
a beam of light to have arrived at
the outside edges and so
if your event lasts say 0.2
seconds as you might get for a short
duration
gamma-ray burst then the whole region
that is involved in that event must be
less than 0.2
light seconds in radius that's around 60
000 kilometers so a quarter of the way
between the earth and the moon
so it means these things must be small
and well small we would associate with
um very compressed dense objects
so white dwarf stars neutron stars
or black holes because ordinary stars
are
way too big for that
sort of duration event
now we know that the merger of two white
dwarf stars
or the explosion of one white dwarf star
due to extra added material
gives us a type 1a supernova and those
have very specific characteristics that
don't match those of gamma-ray bursts
so we can probably rule out white dwarfs
we also know that mergers of black holes
give
gravity waves but no bright flash
we've recently detected the merger of
some
black holes by gravity waves but there
was no optical component
to it at all so it's probably not
something like that which leaves us with
neutron stars
and indeed you won't be surprised to
know that they've this has been
confirmed
they've detected a spiraling in
collision of a pair of neutron stars
the neutron stars orbit each other
and because this process
starts to result in them getting quite
close to each other
they start to give off quite intense
amounts of energy
by gravity waves and these gravity waves
carrying
energy and angular momentum away from
the system
means that the orbits have to
fall inwards to provide that energy and
so the
neutron stars spiral in towards each
other until of course they touch
at which point a total mass exceeds that
tolman oppenheimer
volkov limit and they are forced to
detonate in a huge explosion and we call
those explosions kilo novas
and the result of a
colliding pair of neutron stars is a
killer nova
is very interesting it's recently
discovered that the
massive release of neutrons that occur
when this
uh disruption event happens
is the source of more than half of the
heavy elements
uh in the universe the lead the gold and
the uranium
and so on all the really heavy elements
are formed
by the intense bombardment of neutrons
from colliding pairs of neutron stars
so the life cycle here is that you have
two very massive stars
and eventually first one and then the
other
blows up as a supernova leaving a pair
of neutron stars
orbiting around each other much as the
original stars did
but eventually the radiation of gravity
waves
forces them to collide and so we think
that these short
duration gamma-ray bursts are associated
with the collision
of these neutron stars or these kilonova
explosions as we call them and we think
that
as shown in this diagram when it happens
you can get a jet
formed along the rotation axis
of the spin of the spiral
and material shot out along the jet
can be very very intense and if you're
looking down that beam
because it just happens to be pointing
towards you that's when you see
a gamma ray burst whereas if you are
off axis out of the beam then we see an
ordinary
kilonova explosion
what about the 70 of long duration gamma
ray bursts then
well long duration means the objects
have to be larger by that speed of light
rule
and they have to be uh of the order of
light minutes
um and that's probably
pointing towards supergiant stars things
like
betelgeuse and antares and some of the
real whoppers like the pistol
star um with 50 to 100
solar masses um
and we also turns out that we can track
these
and most of these long-duration
gamma-ray bursts
turn out to be within spiral galaxies
that have
active star-forming regions in them that
are of course
rich in young giant stars and i repeat
there are no
old giant stars in the same way that
there are no old
bold pilots they just don't exist
the uh this all points of course to the
normal core collapse supernovae that we
were talking about
and the death of a giant star
and so the theory goes that these stars
the very largest
classes of stars that
explode so well over 20 solar masses
are what gives rise to the
long duration gamma ray bursts a very
pretty
diagram here of a the evolutionary curve
of a giant star
gradually starting with hydrogen and
adopting that onion-like structure
as it builds all the elements through to
its iron core
and then exploding outwards and forming
a very violent
destructive outcome with a very powerful
jet out of it now
exactly the details of what's going on
there are quite interesting because
inside this massive envelope of this
giant star
the iron core collapses and
over 20 solar masses it forms a black
hole
and so what you have is a black hole
in the middle of the dying star
but still surrounded by all of those
outer layers and instead
of when you form a neutron star the
material
falling inwards because it's now
unsupported
until it collides with the very solid
and rigid
crust of the neutron star and then
rebounding outwards in a shock wave that
blows the rest of the star apart i.e
a core collapse supernova
if these things collapse directly to a
black hole
then there is nothing to rebound from
and so the material can fall inwards
directly into the black hole and feed it
make it larger and larger except for the
fact
that these things are spinning they're
always rotating there's always some
net spin on everything in the universe
so it seems
and so they can't fall directly straight
in or not much of the matter can
so it ends up forming a swirling
accretion disk
and so what you get very soon after the
collapse of the core is a black hole
with an accretion disk spinning around
it
feeding matter into the black hole
that also generates an enormous
high temperatures because of the
friction in the disc
and a very complex and twisted magnetic
field
that forces these jets to form
but this is all happening inside the
star
which the outside layers haven't really
noticed yet
that all of this uh port ends of doom
has occurred in the middle
and so what happens is you get the
jets from the rapidly accreting black
hole
spinning away inside the the center of
this uh
parent star and the jets
force their way out and blast holes
through the polar regions
and then the enormous release of energy
from the accretion disk
also starts to tear the mid part of the
star
to shreds and so you get this absolutely
enormous explosion from the inside out
as all of this energy is released
now black holes
and accretion disks are actually almost
the most
efficient releases of energy
of any process i think nuclear fusion
releases about one percent of the
mass energy according to e equals m c
squared of the uh nuclear fuel that it
consumes
um so it doesn't even consume the whole
of the star it's actually quite
inefficient
in in those terms but a black hole
accretion disk
releases 20 percent of the mass energy
in the form of radiation and gravity
waves and neutrinos and everything else
and so it's hugely more efficient at
releasing energy and so these things are
phenomenally powerful
so the idea if you can kind of imagine
it is you have this black hole
engine inside the star to begin with
which eats the star from the inside
outwards
and forces a shock wave of ever
expanding
uh power outwards through the star along
with the jets
that are carving their way out
and it creates a jet
in both the spin axes
with shock waves traveling along the jet
that can
uh super heat the
matter and accelerate the particles
very much as we do in our particle
accelerators here on earth
there's a sort of animation of it here
of the black hole
growing and eating the star in the
center and these enormously powerful
jets
um acting like particle accelerators
producing these
tightly collimated beams
so those jets are what we see
if we happen to be unlucky enough to be
within the beam within 2 to 20 degrees
of the
direct view straight down the axis
then we'll see the vast amount of energy
that comes out in the beam
and that is when we get the gamma ray
burst
from these objects of course most of
them miss us there's a lot more
directions that you could point these
things in that won't hit the earth than
there are that do
so we see some of these hypernovi as we
would call them
that are direct collapse to a black hole
um as very powerful supernova events
but we see some of them if they're
pointed straight at us
as the long duration gamma ray bursts
now if we
take a little survey now that we've got
uh swift up there and been collecting
data for
15 years or so roughly
one gamma ray burst every day is being
picked up
and the majority of them are from
the other side of the universe from vast
distances
sort of six to nine billion light years
away
and so they were probably happening that
far back in time as well
and the modern universe perhaps doesn't
seem to build
quite as many giant stars and therefore
we don't see quite so many in our
backyard
but the milky way is nevertheless
expected to produce
a grb um on a frequency of once every
ten thousand to a million years
i know that's a big range but uh we're
not entirely sure
just how many of them there will be
and of course only a small percentage
will be aimed at us
so the question therefore is would it
hurt us if we were hit by them
and indeed have we any evidence of
having been hit by
a grb in the in the past from a
a local one rather than the one that we
can observe
from a very safe distance of halfway
across the universe
and digging into this one well it turns
out the answer is probably yes
on more than one occasion and quite
recently too
the year 1775 um
showed a very
striking spike in the
abundance of carbon isotope 14 with two
extra neutrons
and this was detected in trees in japan
and japanese pine trees in particular
but then followed up in australia with
cedar trees
and other observations elsewhere as you
can see on the graph there
so we've got quite a lot of data that
shows that around about 1775
suddenly something happened that
produced a 20-fold
increase in the amount of radioactive
carbon 14
and we also have recently detected
beryllium isotope 10 you know
in core samples from the antarctic from
the same
year um now
that in itself could be down to a number
of different explanations
but we have one particular report
uh translated here from the old english
it says
uh year of our lord anas dominic 1774
this year the northumbrians banished
their king already from
york at easter tide and chose ethelred
son of mull for their lord
who reigned for four winters
this year also appeared in the heavens a
red crucifix after sunset
well that's probably the supernova
the hype and over the gamma ray burst
itself visible
in the night sky and if it's visible
after sunset
in the twilight then it's evidently
probably very very bright indeed and
as it would have to be if we were
correlating
the radio carbon 14 and beryllium 10
data with this so it's highly probable
another possible explanation for this
data though
is that uh we might be looking at
a very very intense solar storm
and maybe that red crucifix thing in the
sky
was an aurora but it doesn't sound
quite plausible to me but the
correlation between beryllium
brilliant 10 at the top here and carbon
14 down here
and chlorine 36 here all
does tend to point maybe to um
it being a solar event
but we're not quite sure what we're more
certain of
is a little bit further back in time
443.8 million years ago
there was a gamma ray burst somewhere
not too far away in our milky way within
about 6 thousand light years
uh which caused a mass extinction event
on earth
um it mostly affected the creatures that
were surfaced living in the sea
and at this stage there was nothing
living on the land anyway
but the deep sea creatures were
protected because they were
under that thick layer of water although
they weren't
completely immune from it because quite
a lot of the plankton were wiped out
and of course those served as the food
for some of the
deeper creatures
and we definitely again see carbon and
oxygen
isotope signatures which really can only
point
to a gamma ray burst
and so this was the event that marked
the end of the ordovician
era and the beginning of the silurian
um period and uh this was the time of uh
the trilobites
and uh the ammonites and the brachiopods
and those sorts of creatures
all before uh really we got anywhere
near
uh modern things like fish or dinosaurs
or amphibians
so very ancient creatures indeed
now just to uh getting towards the end
now but here's uh
just an example of a type of star that
we need to keep a bit of an eye on
um we see some of these stars
in our wednesday night observing
sessions
there's one in the middle of the
crescent nebula which has one of my
targets for this week and these are
hyper giant stars
that are
um in our galaxy and
this particular one wr wolf rayet
104 is 8 000 light years away
and a potential gamma-ray burst
candidate
when it explodes these stars are so
massive
that they've got so hot um in their
in inner regions and are releasing so
much energy that they completely puff
off and blow away their outer
hydrogen layers that's what you can see
is this
sort of planetary nebula imposter here
um but the core inside
is still cooking away it's not dying as
a white dwarf
star in as would be the case for a
normal
planetary nebula here the star is
a outer layer of helium pure helium
with helium burning going on in the
center right through to
uh carbon oxygen neon and
so on up to and including iron
eventually
and you know it's probably got half a
million years to go
this particular star but we might be
wrong
it might be due to collapse next week
it's very very difficult to tell
now we're particularly worried about
this one because we're looking
down the spin axis we can tell that
because
the outflow of the hydrogen envelope is
more or less a circle around it
so we're pretty much looking down the uh
the spin axis
with any luck the magnetic axis will be
offset
and uh with any likely if it does blow
up as a gamma ray burst it will miss us
but we are watching these uh wolf rayet
stars in
the milky way with some interest
and just recently we've been started to
discover
ultra long gamma ray bursts which we
don't really understand they could be
probably something to do with black
holes feeding but
uh perhaps black holes feeding
on entire stars and wolfing them down in
one go
but we don't really know and this
particular one that's referred to here
grb
10 12 25 a
is known as the christmas burst because
it uh
occurred near christmas a couple of
years ago and
this was uh detected again um
by satellite and its overall duration
of the the total event was uh
um seven hours but with a peak of 28
minutes
and so it's really quite a long um tail
on this event
so something rather interesting was
happening
and so that's the story of everything
there is to know about gamma ray bursts
i hope you found that educational i've
just got a couple of extra slides
as we've got time to mention um
about other ways in which particularly
massive stars can die
so we'll go past the the end first of
all
for the the modest size stars between
10 and a half and about 20 solar masses
these die to form neutron stars neutron
stars about the size of a city here's
new york manhattan island here's a
neutron star for scale
and these are formed by what's called
electron capture so
the protons in the nuclei capture
electrons and are converted one plus and
one minus
makes a neutral particle a neutron n um
and they give off a surge of neutrinos
which are marked by the
uh greek symbol nu e there
and so that's the process by which uh
modest size
stars that form neutron stars die
now we've talked about the core collapse
of the
giant stars and the way that they can
go sometimes they go and form a neutron
star and then the neutron star becomes
overloaded
and it goes on to form a black hole
other times they
go straight to a black hole and
one of the things that can happen in
particularly
enormous uh hyper giant stars
is that the gamma ray radiation
in the core can be some becomes so
intense
that it's has enough energy in each
photon to start
creating meta antimatter pairs
in the form of electrons and antimatter
electrons called positrons
now when it does that when when that
limit is reached that gets hot enough
that the gamma rays have that much
energy suddenly they start forming these
electron positron pairs and it suddenly
converts a whole lot of energy into a
whole lot of mass
and that effectively cools
the core of the star very quickly
meaning it can then not resist the
pressure anymore
and so it can crush right down
in an implosion event there and so it
can happen
to these stars before they get to the
point
of running out of fuel if they're large
enough then they
they can detonate as a supernova through
this pair
instability process early
even without reaching the iron stage
um and this tends to happen to the
blue supergiant stars they they don't
undergo the
onion layer structure they tend to blow
up as pair instability
supernovae instead and usually that
results
in a black hole but it can form a
neutron star
temporarily usually the neutron star
then acquires too much mass and
collapses
but it's a complication in terms of
looking at what happens with these very
large stars
and that's true all the way up to 130
solar masses
now there aren't very many stars over
that
but over 130 solar masses
then the
process runs to completion without
leaving
a remnant and so it's the hypernova
is so powerful it destroys the whole
star
and um leaves nothing no no neutron star
and no
um uh black hole either
so it's a different process and
for the really large stars
the largest ones we see that are about
250 solar masses
there is a very curious process that can
occur
called photo disintegration in the core
so they get so hot with and again
produce
very very energetic gamma rays that
as they start trying to build their iron
core ready
for a core collapse over detonation
process described in this little chart
here
the iron nucleus gets hit by a gamma ray
and is smashed into
13 helium nuclei and four neutrons
um and then even the helium nuclei can
be smashed back to protons and neutrons
and this actually reverses all the work
that the star had done
in terms of building up through
the stages of nuclear fusion from
hydrogen to helium
on through all the other steps all the
way to iron
but suddenly the process gets reversed
the gamma rays
become so intense they destroy all these
nuclei right back to their original
components
now when that happens in these cores
again
it it's hopefully obvious that it's it's
consuming
energy to do so because when we built
the
uh heavy nuclei up we released energy
and so to smash them down consumes
energy
um we end up back where we started and
the gamma rays
have fueled the destruction that back
down to the original protons and so
suddenly again
the core of the supernova cools off
very very quickly and then can't sustain
the pressure
on the of the outer layers and so it
triggers a runaway collapse
and usually when this happens the
runaway collapse
goes a hundred percent and the star
just vanishes in an enormous flash
and leaves no noticeable
uh remnant behind it um and so
these very large stars have these couple
of extra bizarre ways of dying
that uh no one ever tells you about but
in the context of uh
hypernovi and gamma ray bursts i thought
i'd throw them in